---
title: CV
layout: page
permalink: /cv/
hidden: true
---

{% include assets/picture.html file="images/pages/ben-soundscapes-21.jpg" alt="Ben performing at Soundscapes #21, Photo by Adam Thomas" %}

{% include toc.html %}

<!-- NOTE: this is largely copypasta'd from research.md---in future I should refactor it more nicely. -->

## Research interests

I am a multidisciplinary researcher and Senior Lecturer in the Research School
of Computer Science at the [Australian National
University](https://cecs.anu.edu.au/people/ben-swift). I'm interested in
computational art & music, data visualisation, human-computer interaction,
AI/machine learning (particularly in pursuit of creative ends) and the
intersection of code, creativity and culture as those boundaries dissolve in the
modern world. I'm the director of the [code/creativity/culture
studio](https://cs.anu.edu.au/code-creativity-culture/) at the ANU Research
School of Computer Science.

<!-- TODO: update link to c/c/c projects page once the new cccstudio website is live -->

I am a **livecoder**, and have performed at both local and international arts
festivals---you can find recordings of some of my sets [on my livecoding
page]({% link livecoding.md %}). I'm the vice president of the [Australasian
Computer Music Association](https://computermusic.org.au) (ACMA)[^acmc]. I'm
also one of the inaugural [ANU Reimagine Fellows]({% link
_posts/2019-08-30-Im-a-reimagine-fellow.md %}), part of a [$300m+ investment
from the ANU](https://cecs.anu.edu.au/reimagine) charged with re-thinking (and
re-doing) what it is to be a computer scientist in the 21st century.

[^acmc]:
    **shameless plug**: you should [submit a paper or creative
    work](http://acmc2020.com/#/features/03-submission) to our [annual
    conference](http://acmc2020.com), which we're hosting at the ANU in July
    2020

I love building things, and one thing I'm particularly excited about is the
potential of **liveness** (real-time human-in-the-loop interactivity) in
programming tools and workflows. I have made significant [open-source code
contributions](https://github.com/benswift) to the international research and
livecoding communities, especially through my work on
[Extempore](https://github.com/digego/extempore): the state-of-the-art in
livecoding languages.

## Qualifications {#qualifications}

### Education

- **2012** Ph.D. _ANU Research School of Computer Science_. Thesis title: "The
  Design of a Smartphone-Based Digital Musical Instrument for Jamming"

- **2007** Bachelor of Science (Honours 1^st^ class, mathematics & physics
  major) _Australian National University_

- **2005** Certificate IV in Music Performance _Canberra Institute of
  Technology_

### Employment history

- **2018--** Senior Lecturer (Level C), _ANU Research School of Computer Science_

- **2017--2018** Lecturer (Level B), _ANU Research School of Computer Science_

- **2013--2016** Postdoctoral Research Fellow (Level B), _ANU Research School of
  Computer Science_

- **2012** Postdoctoral Research Fellow, _QUT Institute for Future Environments_

## Research {#research}

### Projects

TODO

### Grants {#grants}

(_all dollar amounts in AUD, rounded to nearest thousand dollars_)

- **2020--2022** [_Reimagine Fellowship: the c/c/c studio_]({% link
  _posts/2019-03-20-reimagine-fellow-project-pitch.md %}) ($560k)

- **2019** _ANU College of Arts and Social Sciences Teaching and Learning
  Fellowship 2019_ with Sol√®ne Inceoglu, Bernardo Pereira Nunes, and Terhi
  Nurmikko-Fuller ($10k)

- **2018** _Research School of the Humanities & Arts (RSHA)
  Interdisciplinary/Cross-College Collaborative Research Scheme grant_ with
  Greta Hawes, Mitchell Whitelaw, Geoff Hinchliffe, Terhi Nurmikko-Fuller and
  Katrina Grant ($15k)

- **2018** _The ANU School of Music Sound Recording App_ with Sam Bennett and
  Mark Opitz ($17k)

- **2017** _ANU Vice Chancellor's College Visiting Artist Fellowship_ with Kit
  Devine ($5k)

- **2016** _Google Summer of Code_ ($7k)

- **2016** _ANU Vice Chancellor's College Visiting Artist Fellowship_ with Tony
  Curran ($5k)

- **2015** _New Colombo Plan: "Internet of Things" Program at Beijing Institute
  of Technology_ ($132k) (this was a joint grant application between ANU,
  Swinburne and UTS; I was not a CI, but led the development & delivery of this
  cross-institution project)

### Prizes & Awards

- **2018** Vice Chancellor's Citation for Outstanding Contribution to Student
  Learning

- **2017** CECS Dean's Award for Excellence in Education

- **2012** CECS Dean's Award for Outreach (Science Week outreach project)

### Peer-reviewed publications

{% bib_list_pubs ben-pubs.bib %}

### Curated/invited livecoding performances

{% bib_list_gigs %}

## Teaching

### Current courses

I am currently the course convenor & lecturer for the following two courses in
the [ANU Research School of Computer
Science](https://cs.anu.edu.au/courses/comp2300/) (follow links to the
curriculum, available under
[CC-BY-NC-SA](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/)):

- [COMP2710: Laptop Ensemble](https://cs.anu.edu.au/courses/comp2710-lens/) is a
  course open to students in computer science, music, art, and elsewhere at ANU.
  In this course students learn fundamental skills of music computing,
  including digital synthesis, algorithmic composition, and musical
  interface design, putting these skills to use creating a computer
  musical instrument, composition, or interactive media work to
  present in concert at the end of the course.

- [COMP1720: Art & Interaction in New
  Media](https://cs.anu.edu.au/courses/comp1720/) is a course about learning to
  tell stories through interactive code art. It's not _just_ an art course, and
  it's not just a code course: students need to use both halves of their brains,
  and (I hope) have a lot of fun in the process. No previous coding or artistic
  experience is required: COMP1720 teaches everything from the ground up.

### Past courses

I have also written and delivered the following courses:

- [COMP2300: Computer Organisation and Program
  Execution](https://cs.anu.edu.au/courses/comp2300/) is ANU's introductory
  computer architecture course, which I wrote (with help from [Uwe
  Zimmer](https://researchers.anu.edu.au/researchers/zimmer-ur)) and delivered
  from 2017--2018, and is now being delivered by [Charles
  Martin](http://charlesmartin.com.au/). In this course students take a complex
  computer system ([the STM32L476G discovery "disco"
  board](http://www.st.com/en/evaluation-tools/32l476gdiscovery.html)) home from
  week 1. That might seem daunting---and it's true that there's more stuff on
  such a board than one can master in one semester---but students can still
  learn a lot about CPUs (and how programs are organised and executed) by the
  end of the course.

- The [COMP2710 _Internet of Things_ China Study
  Tour](https://cs.anu.edu.au/courses/china-study-tour/) is an in-country
  intensive study course conducted in partnership with the [Beijing Institute of
  Technology](http://english.bit.edu.cn/). In this course students learn about
  low-cost, network-connected embedded computing devices & their relationship to
  the broader computing landscape through building a prototype IoT artefact (and
  releasing the source code, parts list and build instructions on GitHub), while
  reflecting on the design, security, social and ethical challenges associated
  with the Internet of Things.

## Service
