---
title: Research
layout: page
permalink: /research/
---

{% asset images/pages/ben-soundscapes-21.jpg alt="Ben performing at Soundscapes #21, Photo by Adam Thomas" %}

I am a multidisciplinary researcher and Senior Lecturer in the Research School
of Computer Science at the [Australian National
University](https://cecs.anu.edu.au/people/ben-swift). I'm interested in
computational art, data visualisation, human-computer interaction, hardware
hacking/making (particularly towards creative ends) and the intersection of
code, creativity and culture as those boundaries dissolve in the modern world. I
lead the [code/creativity/culture
group](https://cs.anu.edu.au/code-creativity-culture/) at the ANU Research
School of Computer Science (you should check out the [c/c/c group's projects
page](https://cs.anu.edu.au/code-creativity-culture/projects/) as well).

I am a **livecoder**, and have performed at both local and international arts
festivals---you can find recordings of some of my sets [on
vimeo](https://vimeo.com/benswift/videos).

I love building things, and one thing I'm particularly excited about is the
potential of **liveness** (real-time human-in-the-loop interactivity) in
programming tools and workflows. I have made significant [open-source code
contributions](https://github.com/benswift) to the international research and
livecoding communities, especially through my work on
[Extempore](https://github.com/digego/extempore): the state-of-the-art in
livecoding languages.

{:.hl-para}

To get a sense for my current ongoing research projects, head to the
[c/c/c](https://cs.anu.edu.au/code-creativity-culture/) website---that's the
most up-to-date list of all the things that me and my group are working on.

### Come study with me

If you're interested in doing Honours/Masters/PhD research with me, [send me an
email](mailto:ben.swift@anu.edu.au). I always have a few project ideas kicking
around, but I'm also open to hearing about the project/big idea that excites
*you*. Send me

1. a **one-paragraph** description of the project you're interested in doing,
   and
2. a **link to something you've made**: a livecoding video, a project on GitHub,
   an academic paper---even a blog post
   
I get a lot of emails about this sort of thing, so including these two things is
a great way to show that you've thought a bit about what sort of research
project you're interested in (and why I'd be a good fit). You should think hard
about how to make your email stand out from the crowd.
