---
layout: post
title: Centre for the Public Awareness of Code
date: 2018-06-05 09:13
tags:
---

*What's your favourite movie? Favourite band/album?* Most folks already have an
answer to these questions (because they've been asked before). *What's your
favourite scientist or scientific theory/fact?* This one is harder, but thanks
to great work by many [gifted](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carl_Sagan)
[science](http://drkarl.com/) [communicators](https://twitter.com/ANU_CPAS)
people increasingly have an answer to those questions.

*What's your favourite bit of (software) code? What's your favourite algorithm?*
I reckon that most people will struggle to have an answer. In fact, most folks
probably won't understand the question. Yet code (and the algorithms they
manifest) *does* impact the world today. Mark Zuckerberg is still travelling
around with a suit and a haircut apologising for that fact.

This isn't about setting up a dichotomy between those who "get" code and those
who don't, and it certainly isn't about adding a moral dimension to code
literacy (so that if you don't code, you're a bad person). There are some
amazing code communicators out there---check out Dan Shiffman on the [Coding
Train](http://thecodingtrain.com/). And there's stuff like [Critical Code
Studies
(CCS)](http://www.electronicbookreview.com/thread/electropoetics/codology),
although that's more about understanding code-as-text *deeply* rather than
raising awareness of what code is currently doing in the world.

What we need is a **Centre for the Public Awareness of Code**, with a bunch of
folks doing for code/software/algorithms what Carl Sagan did for space science
with [Cosmos](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosmos:_A_Personal_Voyage). I've got
some ideas about how we could do it ([musical
livecoding](https://vimeo.com/269115310) is one of them) but I'm sure there are
other ways as well.

Agree/disagree? Let's discuss on [twitter](https://twitter.com/benswift) :)
