---
title: Making the most of meetings with research students
tags: teaching
---

Supervising research students is hard work (or at least I find it hard work to
do a good job) but it's really very rewarding. From PhD & MPhil students through
to undergraduate research project students[^project-students], there are lots of
meetings to be had. And everyone knows that meetings suck, or at least that
_bad_ meetings suck.

[^project-students]:
    You've probably heard that CS enrolments are through the roof---it's a great
    (if a bit hectic) time to be a CS academic (even a multidisciplinary one
    ðŸ˜‰). The enrolment thing isn't just a first-year problem, either---the
    pipeline is full all the way through to the "capstone" research projects
    that many students take at the end of their degree.

So, here are some thoughts in my brain for conducting one-on-one meetings with
research students. As research student numbers grow, I wanna have a good
"template" for each meeting, and then vary as necessary.

## (Default) meeting agenda

### What's your research question in one sentence?

Look, I still find this hard sometimes---but it's an important skill to be able
to clearly articulate what your research question is in any particular project.
Since it's only once sentence, it doesn't take long, and having this weekly
practice at articulating it (with feedback) means that when it comes time to
write things up, much of the hard thinking in articulating things is already
done.

### Show me a _thing_ that you're currently working on

In every meeting, I want my student to show me a thing they're working on. It
might be a piece of software, it might be a piece of writing (e.g. a paper draft
or thesis chapter), it might be a piece of hardware/music/art. _I wanna see
something that you're working on_.

I'm a livecoder, so I love live demos, and being able to give a short demo of
one's work-in-progress is a good skill to develop (you never know when you'll
get an impromptu chance to show off what you're working on).

[Philip Guo also emphasises how helpful it is to have a thing to talk about in a
research supervisory
meeting](http://pgbovine.net/advice-for-first-year-PhD-students.htm) (see the
"Intermission" video in the linked blog post).

### Are there any upcoming dates I should be aware of?

It's hard to remember all the admin dates for different courses/programs/paper
deadlines, and I can't remember all that stuff for _every_ student. Instead,
tell me if there are any dates coming up which I/we should be aware of.

### What's your next step? What's getting in the way?

Students don't get _that_ much face-to-face time with their supervisor---even
with an attentive one. So it's important to make sure that after each meeting
there's a clear next step, and in particular that if there are any "blockers"
we can discuss them there and then, and brainstorm strategies to deal with them.

## This is a work-in-progress

Obviously sometimes there are specific things to discuss relevant to a
particular student/project, and in those situations I'll tweak the agenda as
necessary. This "template" is hopefully simple and helpful, though, and I'll let
you know how it goes ðŸ˜Š
